[RFC] Unified device/target/memory scope planning (#38)
apache/tvm-rfcs: rfcs/0038-unified-device-target-and-memory-scope-planning.md

   `<name>`.
5. The rest of the compilation flow treats `"Compiler"` annotated functions specially.

We have 6 problems:
1. TVM is being targeted to environments with multiple CPUs (eg Arm 'Big.LITTLE') and multiple
   tensor-friendly devices (eg a GPU as well as an accelerator such as Arm 'Ethos-U'). This means a
   `DLDeviceType` no longer uniquely determines a `Target`.
2. Though TVM's `Device` abstraction (an alias for `dlpack`'s `DLDevice`) is a pair of a
   `DLDeviceType` and an arbitrary 'device id', TVM does not consistently plumb the device id
   through annotations, passes and operators.  Thus currently we cannot use 'device id' to
   distinguish, eg, two CPUs in the same system.
3. Upcoming work requires us to distinguish and propagate memory scopes for data at the Relay
   level. (See also [RFC #9](https://github.com/apache/tvm-rfcs/blob/main/rfcs/0009_Unified_Static_Memory_Planning.md)
   which has a similar need for memory scope propagation at the TIR level). This is an identical
   problem to propagating devices, and it seems most natural to simply combine targets, devices and

>    memory scopes into a single 'target of device planing' rather than implementing a whole new pass.

Reviewer: i agree, but just clarifying we aren't using a single identifier to describe both the device and the memory scope?

4. Device planning currently has no machinery to hoist adjacent expressions which share the same device
   into their own Relay `Function`. For all our executors except VM that's unnecessary anyway since
   all Relay expressions left over after lowering are interpreted by the runtime. However for AOT we

>    have to compile *all* Relay code for a particular target. Note the BOYC machinery does support this,
>    but for the purposes of redirecting the compilation flow entirely. We need a middle ground.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   have to compile *all* Relay code for a particular target. Note the BYOC machinery does support this,
   but for the purposes of more accurately modeling offloaded compute in the main compilation flow, we need a middle ground.
```

   | Source of annotations | `on_device`, `device_copy` | `FTVMAnnotateTarget`, `MergeComposite`+patterns |
   | Target of planning    | DLDeviceType               | Toolchain name                                  |
   | Propagation           | Unification based          | Ad-hoc                                          |
   | Relay support         | Full                       | First-order, no ADTs                            |
   | Delimiting            | insert `device_copy`       | insert `compiler_begin`, `compiler_end`         |
   | Multiple per expr     | No                         | Yes (though always picks first)                 |
   | Hoists into functions | No                         | Yes                                             |
   | Customized heuristics | No                         | No                                              |

   Taking the 'upper bound' of the two implementations seems ideal, especially to address issues 4 (limitation
   of device planning) and 5 (limitation of BYOC) above.

Our proposal is:
1. We introduce a new FFI-friendly class to represent a *S*torage or *E*xecution *Scope*:

   ```
   class SEScope {
     DLDeviceType device_type;

>      int virtual_device_id;

Reviewer: i think this should be a String name which makes sense to the user. Doing this is helpful for a couple other reasons besides the compilation UI:
- In generated source code, it's possible to refer to the device by name. In particular, the embedded C API would like to have this for the conglomerate tvm_device_t struct.
- In systems with multiple e.g. CPUs, using an index here then implies some ordering (e.g. littlest CPU to biggest). It's better to make the assignment of ID to CPU capability more explicit

Finally, using a name would simplify the heterogeneous Target.

However, this is a bit of a lift. I do feel strongly we should get to this world. If it's not something that makes sense to do now, we could also revisit after or concurrent with USMP.

   `device_type` must equal `target->kind->device_type`.

2. At this stage we leave the `memory_scope` field uninterpreted. For example, we don't attempt to
   represent that, eg, `"global"` on a `kDLCPU` is the same memory area as `"host"` on a `kDLCUDA` and thus no
   `device_copy` operation is required between those scopes. We'll pick this issue up again after
   [RFC #9](https://github.com/apache/tvm-rfcs/blob/main/rfcs/0009_Unified_Static_Memory_Planning.md)
   has landed.

3. The `on_device` and `device_copy` call attributes use `SEScope`s instead of integers. However the Python
   bindings for these 'operators' continue to accept a `Device` for convenience. The machinery in `LowerTEPass`
   which resolves `DLDeviceTypes` to `Targets` is moved up in the compilation flow and becomes part of
   `PlanDevices`. In particular, any `SEScope` encountered during device planning is 'canonicalized' to fill
   in a `Target` by the same lookup as we do today. This means we continue to support the easy shorthand of
   referring to devices by the `DLDeviceType` alone. However, advanced users can supply a `SEScope` to these

>    operators which contains the exact `Target` to use.

Reviewer: what would be roughly the deprecation plan here? eventually we ban all the inputs to the compiler which could refer to SEScope in terms of DLDeviceType and then tighten the typing requirements here? this would be a backwards-incompatible Relay change. cc @jroesch

4. We rework device planning to be in terms of `SEScope`s instead of `DLDeviceTypes`. Two `SEScope`s
   become special:
    - We need a default scope for all primitive operators which are not otherwise
      constrained to a particular scope.
    - We need a scope for 'host-only' operations and data, such as for shapes and shape functions.
      (Currently this is hardcoded to `kDLCPU`).

5. We extend `PlanDevices` to be able to a) run *after* lowering and b) refine existing constraints.  It will
   look inside calls to `PrimFunc`s and follow the chain:

   ```
   tir::PrimFunc.buffer_map -> tir::Buffer.data -> tir::Var.type_annotation -> PointerType.storage_scope -> String
   ```

>    to discover the memory scope for each Relay argument. That scope will enter `SEScope`s and flow through the

Reviewer: what do you mean by "enter `SEScope`s"?

   existing unification machinery. The existing sub-pass in `PlanDevices` will insert `device_copy` calls
   wherever sub-expressions disagree on their memory scope.

   (An additional pass is planned to heuristically move `device_copy`s around, and eliminate redundant
    copies, however that's outside the scope of this RFC.)

6. We rework `PartitionGraph` to `PartitionBySEScope` to work on `SEScope` annotations instead of
   `compiler_begin` and `compiler_end` annotations. Algorithmically it's not a big change -- maximal
   sub-expressions which share the same `SEScope` (or a projection thereof, eg just the `target`) are hoisted

>    into global `Function`s. The function's `"result_se_scope"` attribute describes both the scope holding the

Reviewer: so then here, this sort of implements the "grouping adjacent expressions onto the same device" as a side-effect?

   function's result *and* the `Target` for which the function is to be compiled.

7. We allow `MergeComposite` to be used to insert `on_device` annotations, call it `MergeAndAnnotate`.

8. (?) We rework `AnnotateTarget` to just look for `FTVMAnnotateTarget` operator attributes, call it

>    `AnnotateSEScopes`. When the function fires an `on_device` annotation is inserted. However since

Reviewer: clarifying my understanding:
```suggestion
   `AnnotateSEScopes`. When `FTVMAnnotateSEScopes` returns true, an `on_device` annotation is inserted. However since
```
